Title: Daily Briefing: Trump wins.
Source: USA Today
URL: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2024/11/06/election-harris-trump-senate-abortion-nfl-hurricane-inflation/76086957007/
Published: 2024-11-06T00:00:00
Text: Donald Trump will return to the White House after defeating Kamala Harris in an extraordinary comeback. Republicans have taken control of the Senate. And the balance of power is still up for grabs in the House.

Former President Donald Trump, considered a political outcast after losing the presidency in 2020 and an attack by his supporters on the U.S. Capitol, was elected to another term on Wednesday in a decisive and astounding victory over Vice President Kamala Harris.

What happened: But Trump picked up North Carolina, Georgia, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, with the Badger State pushing him over the threshold of 270 electoral votes to win the race. Follow USA TODAY's live election results tracker.

What else to know: Trump quickly picked up Florida, Ohio and several Southern Republican strongholds, including Texas. Harris won a group of states in the Northeast, stretching from Vermont to Maryland, as well as New York and her home state of California.

How did Harris lose? The Democratic presidential nominee struggled to explain what she would do differently than President Joe Biden, a fatal campaign flaw that doomed her election bid.

The race was both improbable and historic. Trump's return to the White House comes after he was impeached twice, survived two assassination attempts and was convicted of 34 felony counts.

Hearing from the candidates: Harris will come home to Howard University on Wednesday to address the results of the election. Trump declared victory in a speech last night in West Palm Beach, Florida.

Republicans have seized the Senate, too. Republicans have won control of the U.S. Senate and remain locked in a tight battle for control of the House of Representatives. All 435 House seats are up for election this year, and a handful of close matchups could make or break which party winds up with the majority.

Two targets where Democrats fell short on Tuesday in their bid to flip Republican-held Senate seats: Florida and Texas, where GOP Sens. Rick Scott and Ted Cruz won new terms.
