Erika (Neuman) Eckstut was born on June 12, 1928, in Znojmo, a town in the Moravian region of Czechoslovakia with a Jewish community dating back to the thirteenth century. Her father was a respected attorney and an ardent Zionist who hoped to emigrate with his family to Palestine. In 1931, the Neumans moved to Stanesti, a town in the Romanian province of Bukovina, where Erika's paternal grandparents lived.

In Stanesti, Erika attended the public school as well as the Hebrew school, which her father had helped found. She loved to play with her sister Beatrice and the other children in the town and enjoyed being with her grandfather. Her childhood was filled with hopes and dreams for the future. In 1937, however, members of the fascist Iron Guard tried to remove Erika's father from his position as the chief civil official in Stanesti. Eventually, a court cleared him of the fabricated charges and he was restored to his post.

In 1940, the Soviet Union occupied Bukovina. A year later, when Romania joined Nazi Germany in the war against the Soviet Union, the Soviets were driven from Stanesti. Mobs then carried out bloody attacks on the town's Jews. During the violence, Erika and her family fled to Czernowitz with the aid of the local police chief. In fall of 1941, the Neumans were forced to settle in the Czernowitz ghetto, where living conditions were poor and they were subject to deportation to Transnistria. In 1943, Erika and Beatrice escaped from the ghetto using false papers that their father had obtained. After escaping to the Soviet Union, Erika and Beatrice returned to Czechoslovakia after World War II, where they were eventually reunited with their parents.

Erika married an officer in the Czech army and raised two children. After many years of hard effort and her mother and sister's appeals to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, she was permitted to emigrate from Czechoslovakia to the United States in 1960, three years after the death of her husband. Once in the United States, Erika became a supervisor of a pathology lab. 
