Russia continued its aerial campaign against the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv, launching cruise missiles and drones against the city Thursday night, according to Ukraine’s armed forces.

The Ukrainian air force said its air defenses intercepted all 15 of the Russian cruise missiles and all 21 of the Iranian-made Shahed drones. 

Kyiv has been under intensifying bombardment over the past month as Russia has shifted from its winter strategy of destroying Ukraine’s energy infrastructure to targeting the capital city with frequent strikes, usually at night.

Ukraine has said Russia is trying to wear down the morale of the civilian population and to deplete Ukraine’s air defenses ahead of its expected offensive aimed at taking back land occupied by Russia’s invasion forces. 

“The likelihood of missile and airstrikes across Ukraine remains high,” the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces said early Friday. 

The front line in eastern and southern Ukraine has been relatively stable since Russian forces, spearheaded by the Wagner paramilitary group, took the eastern city of Bakhmut in May after a draining monthslong battle. 

Wagner has said the fight for Bakhmut cost the lives of 20,000 of its fighters. The paramilitary group’s founder, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has launched bitter tirades against top Russian military officials and the Kremlin. The open feuding has exposed cracks in Russia’s power structure. 

Ukraine’s general staff reported Russian attempts to advance in the eastern Luhansk and Donetsk regions, which it said were unsuccessful, and said Russian forces were on the defensive on the southern front. 

Many military analysts expect Ukraine to try to break through Russia’s defensive lines in the south to cut the land bridge connecting Russia and occupied eastern Ukraine with the Crimean Peninsula. Ukraine has loudly signaled that an offensive is coming, but has kept its timing and direction secret. 

Meanwhile, fighting continued in Russia’s Belgorod region, which borders Ukraine, and which has seen a series of incursions in recent weeks. Groups of Russian nationals opposed to Russian President Vladimir Putin and supported by Ukrainian military intelligence have claimed responsibility. 

One of the groups, the Freedom of Russia Legion, said it was fighting the Russian army on the outskirts of a village south of Belgorod city. It accused Russian artillery of hitting a civilian car, killing at least two people. The governor of the Belgorod region, Vyacheslav Gladkov, blamed Ukrainian forces for shelling a road near the village and killing two civilians. The claims couldn’t be independently verified. 

Gladkov said in a Telegram post that more than 2,500 residents in the area remained in temporary accommodation centers following the evacuation of border villages. 

The governor of Russia’s Bryansk region, which also borders Ukraine, said two villages were shelled by Ukrainian armed forces. There were no casualties, the governor, Alexander Bogomaz, said in a post on Telegram. 

In Ukraine’s Russian-occupied south, footage posted on social media showed a large explosion at the port of Berdyansk in an apparent strike. 

Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region, told the state Komsomolskaya Pravda radio Friday that the attack on the port was likely carried out using Storm Shadow air-to-ground cruise missiles supplied to Ukraine by the U.K., but he added that authorities were waiting for more details from the Russian military, the state news agency TASS reported. Local officials said nine people were injured in the attack.

In a speech in Helsinki on Friday, U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken vowed that Western allies’ support for Ukraine’s defense would continue. Casting doubt on offers by several world leaders to broker near-term peace talks, Blinken said Putin wasn’t ready to negotiate a peace deal that restores Ukraine’s territorial integrity.

“Precisely because we have no illusions about Putin’s aspirations, we believe the prerequisite for meaningful diplomacy and real peace is a stronger Ukraine—capable of deterring and defending against any future aggression,” Blinken said.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters Friday that Ukraine’s appeals to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were proof that Kyiv is unable or unwilling to resolve the conflict at the negotiating table. He added that there were currently no options for peace negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv. “We can’t see it, and there are no prerequisites,” he said. Kremlin officials have previously said Ukraine would have to recognize Russia’s claim to several Ukrainian regions, most of which Russian forces only partially control, as a precondition for peace.

Meanwhile, Switzerland resisted international pressure to help with Ukraine’s defense needs.

The Swiss parliament late on Thursday voted against a proposed bill that would have allowed other European countries to give Ukraine weapons and ammunition that they bought from Switzerland. Germany, Spain and Denmark have all requested Switzerland’s permission to transfer Swiss-made military supplies to Kyiv. 

The bill would have created a temporary exception to Switzerland’s ban on the sale of arms to war zones. Opponents of the bill said it would have undermined Swiss neutrality and brought the country too close to NATO. The war in Ukraine has sparked a debate in Switzerland about overhauls to its policy of blocking other countries from transferring Swiss-made arms to Kyiv.
