U.S. Rep. Liz Cheney conceded defeat Tuesday in the Republican primary in Wyoming, an outcome that was a priority for former President Donald Trump as he urged GOP voters to reject one of his most prominent critics on Capitol Hill.

The race wasn’t close. Harriet Hageman, a water and natural-resources attorney who was endorsed by the former president, won 66.3% of the vote to Ms. Cheney’s 28.9%, with 95% of all votes counted.

Ms. Cheney was the last House Republican to face a primary among the 10 who voted to impeach Mr. Trump for his actions related to the Jan. 6 Capitol riot.

“No House seat, no office in this land is more important than the principles we swore to protect,” Ms. Cheney said in her concession speech. “Our nation is barreling once again toward crisis, lawlessness and violence. No American should support election deniers.”

Ms. Cheney’s loss also marks a remarkable fall for a political family that has loomed large in Republican politics in the sparsely populated state for more than four decades. Her father is former Vice President Dick Cheney, who was elected to the House in 1978, where he served for a decade.

Only two of the Republicans who voted to impeach Mr. Trump won their primaries against Trump-backed challengers. The other losses and retirements mean that if Republicans regain control of the House in November, as expected, the caucus will be dominated by members loyal to the former president, who is considering another run for the White House in 2024.

Ms. Cheney will continue to serve until January 2023, when the new Congress convenes—and will continue as co-chair of the special House committee investigating the events leading up to the Jan. 6 riot and Mr. Trump’s role in them. The assault came as Congress was certifying President Joe Biden’s victory over the former president.

Mr. Trump was acquitted in the Senate in February 2021, in the proceeding that involved the Jan. 6 riot.

“This is a wonderful result for America, and a complete rebuke of the Unselect Committee of political Hacks and Thugs,” Mr. Trump posted on Truth Social. “Now [Cheney] can finally disappear into the depths of political oblivion where, I am sure, she will be much happier than she is right now.”

In her victory speech, Ms. Hageman, who is expected to win the House seat in the November general election, said “we can dislodge entrenched politicians who believe they’ve risen above the people they’re supposed to represent and serve.”

Ms. Cheney’s loss also highlights the significant shift away from established figures within the Republican Party since Mr. Trump’s election.