Title: Trump and Harris clash in fiery presidential debate, call each other liars
Source: Press TV
Published: 2024-09-11T00:00:00
URL: https://www.presstv.ir/Detail/2024/09/11/733061/Trump-and-Harris-clash-in-fiery-presidential-debate
Text: Democratic US Vice President Kamala Harris and her Republican rival, former president Donald Trump, have called each other liars during their first fiery presidential debate for the November 2024 election.

The two candidates on Tuesday traded barbs over a host of issues including abortion, immigration, and the US economy. The debate was hosted by ABC News and was moderated by “World News Tonight” anchor David Muir and “ABC News Live Prime” anchor Linsey Davis.

The presidential candidates also leveled accusations at each other about their approach toward foreign policy and their personal dealings with foreign nations.

Pro-Palestine activists staged protests outside the venue of the presidential debate in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The protesters slammed Washington's unconditional support for Israel, demanding an end to the ongoing Genocide in Gaza.

Regarding the war in Ukraine, Trump said an end to the hostilities is in Washington’s interests, while Harris accused Trump of siding with Russian President Putin.

The genocide in Gaza also heated the contentious debate, with Harris saying she is working around the clock to bring about a Gaza ceasefire.

Trump however said he believed Israel would no longer exist under Harris administration.

Trump accused Harris of doing little to keep American ally Israel intact.

He said that under a Harris presidency, Israel would be "gone. "

"She hates Israel. If she's president, I believe that Israel will not exist within two years from now," Trump said. "Israel will be gone. "

She shot back at Trump saying that his claim of her hating Israel was "absolutely not true. ”

Harris said that Trump is an international laughing stock who is easily manipulated by some of the world's top leaders as the former Republican president called Joe Biden and Harris the worst president and vice president in US history.

"I have traveled the world as vice president of the United States and world leaders are laughing at Donald Trump. I have talked with military leaders, some of whom worked with you, and they say you're a disgrace," she said, addressing him directly.

The Democratic vice president added that it was "well-known that these dictators and autocrats are rooting for you to be president again because they're so clear -- they can manipulate you with flattery and favors, and that is why so many military leaders who you have worked with have told me you are a disgrace. "

Harris said Trump would "give up" in the face of pressure from Putin, who would "eat you for lunch. "

"Putin would be sitting in Kiev with his eyes on the rest of Europe, starting with Poland," Harris said, noting "how quickly you would give up for the sake of favor and what you think is a friendship with what is known to be a dictator who would eat you for lunch. "

Harris reminded Trump that he was no longer running against Biden.

"It's important to remind the former president, you're not running against Joe Biden, you're running against me," she said.

Trump said that he "probably took a bullet to the head" because his opponents have criticized him as being a threat to democracy.

"I probably took a bullet to the head because of the things that they say about me. They talk about democracy. I'm a threat to democracy. They're the threat to democracy," Trump said.

He was referring to an attempted assassination during a rally in Pennsylvania in July, in which he was wounded.

Trump calls Harris ‘worst vice president’ in US history

Trump questioned why Harris had not enacted her plans while in the White House.

“She’s going to do all these wonderful things,” Trump said. “Why hasn’t she done it? She’s been there for three and a half years. They’ve had three and a half years to fix the border. They’ve had three and a half years to create jobs and all the things we talked about. ”

He concluded the debate by calling Biden and Harris the worst president and vice president in the US history.

Before the debate was even over, Trump’s campaign sent an email declaring “victory. "

“President Trump delivered a masterful debate performance tonight, prosecuting Kamala Harris’ abysmal record of failure that has hurt Americans for the last 4 years,” the campaign said in a statement.
