Title: She scored, and he rambled. How Kamala Harris finally cornered Donald Trump in a fiery debate
Source: Toronto Star
Published: 2024-09-11T00:00:00
URL: https://www.thestar.com/news/analysis/she-scored-and-he-rambled-how-kamala-harris-finally-cornered-donald-trump-in-a-fiery/article_b07fa7b4-700d-11ef-8690-1fcae4621b6e.html
Text: Donald Trump was hunted from the start.

When Kamala Harris cornered the evasive former president behind his podium for a pre-debate handshake Tuesday night, it was reminiscent of how Trump had stalked and loomed over Hillary Clinton on the debate stage in the 2016 presidential campaign.

And it was the first hint of the feistiness Harris would bring to this all-important war of words.

She spent much of the night taking the fight to Trump, turning the question-and-answer session into a condemnation of the Republican candidate and the chaos he has spread in America and across the world.

“Understand what it would mean if Donald Trump were back in the White House with no guard rails,” Harris said, adding that “it’s up to the American people to stop him.”

Trump, who claims to be standing up for hard-done-by Americans in seeking a second presidential term, shot back not with a rebuttal but a complaint.

“I probably took a bullet to the head because of the things (Democrats) say about me,” he said, referring to a July assassination attempt in which a shooter grazed Trump’s ear and killed a man attending one of the former president’s political rallies.

“They talk about democracy, I’m a threat to democracy. They’re the threat to democracy.”

It was one of many unsuccessful attempts by Trump to deflect Harris’s attacks. He was also challenged on his handling of the economy, his plans to end the wars in Ukraine and Gaza and his record of exacerbating racial divisions in the country.

On this night, Harris largely anticipated Trump’s game plan and called him out on what she said was “the same old tired playbook — a bunch of lies, grievances and name calling.”

The truth, she said, was that, rather than any fabled greatness, Trump had presided over unemployment, a public health epidemic and an attack on democracy.

“What we have done is clean up Donald Trump’s mess.”

Harris presented herself as “a middle-class kid” raised by a single mother running against a man who “got handed $400 million on a silver platter and then filed bankruptcy six times.” (Trump said he received a “tiny fraction” of that amount and “built it into many, many billions of dollars.”)

“What is important is that there is a president who actually brings values and a perspective that is about lifting people up and not beating people down,” Harris said. “I intend to be that president.”

She highlighted a child tax-credit for young families, support for small businesses, restored abortion access, reduced reliance on polluting fuel sources, expanded health-care access and backed both Israel’s security and a two-state solution for the Palestinians.

She managed to mix in her personal story, for those still getting to know her, with those policy proposals, all while pressuring Trump over his record and plans.

Harris said that as a prosecutor, attorney general in California, then senator and vice-president, she has only ever worked on behalf of the people.

“As a prosecutor, I never asked a victim or a witness, ‘Are you a Republican or a Democrat?’ The only thing I ever asked them is, ‘Are you OK?’ That’s the kind of president we need right now.”

After the first presidential debate in June against a feeble-looking Joe Biden, Trump was forced to pull his punches, lest he come across as merciless.

But he was on the ropes early and often Tuesday when what he needed to do was to hold Harris to account for the entirety of the Biden-Harris White House record.

Instead, Trump faced accusations that his proposed tariffs on imported goods would spark increased prices, that he would threaten women’s lives and opportunities by denying abortion access, and that he would endanger security in the United States and around the world by cosying up to despots like Russia’s Vladimir Putin or North Korea’s Kim Jong Un.

“It is absolutely well known that these dictators and autocrats are rooting for you to be president again, because they’re so clear that they can manipulate you with flattery and favours,” Harris charged.

For good measure, she referred to Putin as “a dictator who would eat (Trump) for lunch.”

Trump even struggled to get a foothold on firmer, well-trod policy ground that had turned swampy.

On the economy and immigration, Trump has been clear, consistent and unflinching.

He has boasted that he was the architect of “one of the greatest economies in the history of our country.”

“I’ll do it again and even better,” he pledged in the debate.

But Harris accused Trump, accurately, of running a trade deficit with China. She also said his government sold microchips to China that were used for military purposes, and Trump struggled to come up with a firm rebuttal, saying it was Taiwan that sold microchips to China.

“He basically sold us out, when a policy about China should be in making sure the United States of America wins the competition for the 21st century,” Harris said.

On the flow of undocumented migrants across the southern U.S. border, Trump said that Harris had done little to improve the situation after being tapped by Biden in 2021 to address the root causes of migration from Central American countries.

And he continued to characterize migrants as dangerous and violent criminals who posed a threat to Americans.

But then he repeated wild and unproven claims about immigrants in Springfield, Ohio, stealing and eating cats and dogs — one of the stranger moments of the night.

“They’re eating the pets of the people that live there,” Trump said. “This is what’s happening in our country and it’s a shame.”

The claim that migrants were eating domesticated animals prompted debate moderators to correct the record and note that, contrary to what Trump had said, Springfield’s city manager had debunked the claim.

It wasn’t the only intervention to separate truth from fiction.

On abortion, Trump distorted years-old comments from a former governor in West Virginia that claim Democrats would permit abortion in the ninth month of pregnancy and said that Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, Harris’s vice-presidential nominee, had backed “execution after birth.”

This seemingly nonsensical claim forced another intervention by moderators to clarify that it is illegal everywhere in the U.S. to kill a baby after birth.

A third fact check came when Trump claimed that “migrant crime” was on the rise in the U.S.

“It’s happening at levels that nobody thought possible,” he said before moderators noted that FBI statistics show violent crime decreasing in the country.

The last, and perhaps most decisive correction came from Harris herself, when Trump claimed she was a “radical left liberal” who planned to seize guns from firearms owners.

“This business about taking everyone’s guns away … Tim Walz and I are both gun owners,” Harris said. “We’re not taking anybody’s guns away, so stop with the continuous lying about this stuff.”

Voters who were hesitant but open to voting for Harris probably heard all they needed in the debate to support that choice.

The Democratic nominee was articulate, delivered strong, coherent arguments and pitched a big tent with enough space for left-wingers, moderates and conservatives opposed to another four years of Trump rule.

But Trump voters are anything but hesitant.

Having stood by him through four years in the White House, through his false stolen-election claims, his various legal battles and this summer’s assassination attempt, it’s difficult to imagine they’ll be lured by the calls of a California Democrat like Harris.

What can be safely said of Tuesday night’s clash is that Harris did everything she had to do — and even a bit more.

Trump’s debate to-do list was shorter, but he struggled to accomplish even those limited tasks.

This was probably best illustrated in the concluding statements each presidential candidate delivered.

When Trump demanded that Harris be judged on her record as President Biden’s right-hand woman since 2020, it was one of just a few times he had managed to clearly make the point.

In contrast, Harris spent the entire night languorously looping back to the tagline she had prepared for the American people: “We’re not going back. … We chart a new way forward.”
