Former President Trump was found guilty on all counts in his historic and unprecedented criminal trial, making him the first former president of the United States to be convicted of a crime. 

Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg charged former President Donald Trump with 34 counts of falsifying business records in the first degree.

Trump pleaded not guilty to all counts.

Jurors found the former president guilty on all counts.

Each count carries a maximum prison sentence of 4 years. In total, Trump faces a maximum sentence of 136 years. 

Judge Juan Merchan invited the jury into the courtroom to read its verdict after two days of deliberations. 

Sentencing for the former president will be July 11 at 10:00 a.m--just four days before the start of the Republican National Convention, where he is expected to be formally nominated as the 2024 Republican presidential nominee. The convention is July 15- 18 in Milwaukee. 

Any motions will need to be filed by June 13th.

The conviction does not bar Trump from running for president. 

Prosecutors needed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Trump falsified those records to conceal a $130,000 payment to Stormy Daniels, a pornographic performer, in the lead-up to the 2016 election to silence her about an alleged affair with Trump in 2006.

Moments after the verdict was delivered by the jury, the former president spoke to reporters in the hallway outside the courtroom. 

"This was a disgrace. This was a rigged trial by a conflicted judge who was corrupt as a rigged trial and disgrace. It wouldn't give us a venue change," Trump said. "We were at five percent or 6% in this district, in this area. This was a rigged, disgraceful trial." 

Trump said "the real verdict is going to be November 5th by the people." 

"And they know what happened here and everybody knows what happened here," Trump said. "You have a Soros backed DA and the whole thing." 

He added: "We didn't do anything wrong. I'm a very innocent man. And it's okay. I'm fighting for our country. I'm fighting for our Constitution. Our whole country is being rigged right now." 

Trump said that the case was "done by the Biden administration in order to wound or hurt an opponent, a political opponent." 

"And I think it's it's just a disgrace. And we'll keep fighting--we'll fight till the end and we'll win because our country's gone to hell," he said. "We don't have the same country anymore. We have a divided mess. We're a nation of decline, serious decline." 

Trump said "millions and millions of people pouring into our country right now from prisons and from mental institutions, terrorists. And they're taking over our country. We have a country that's in big trouble." 

"But this was a rigged decision right from day one, with a conflicted judge who should have never been allowed to try this case. Never," he said. "And we will fight for our Constitution. This is long from over." 

Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg held a press conference Thursday evening, and thanked the jury for its service. 

"We should all be thankful for the careful attention that this jury paid to the evidence and the law in their time and commitment," he said. "Over these past several weeks. 12 everyday New Yorkers and of course, our alternates heard testimony from 22 witnesses, including former and current employees of the defendant, media executives, book publishers, custodians of records and others. Their review, call logs, text messages and emails. They heard recordings. They saw checks and invoices, bank statements and calendar appointments. 

He added: "This type of white collar prosecution is core to what we do at the Manhattan District Attorney's office."

Bragg said the jurors made a decision, leading them "to a unanimous conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant, Donald J. Trump, is guilty of 34 counts of falsifying business records in the first degree to conceal a scheme to corrupt the 2016 election.

"While this defendant may be unlike any other in American history, we arrived at this trial and ultimately today at this verdict, in the same manner as every other case that comes to the courtroom doors by following the facts and the law and doing so without fear or favor," Bragg said. 

Bragg defended himself, and said: "I did my job. Our job is to follow the facts and the law without fear or favor. And that's exactly what we did here." 

"I did my job. We did our job. Many voices out there. The only voice that matters is the voice of the jury," he said. "And the jury has spoken." 

After the verdict, Trump's campaign website was updated to say he is "a political prisoner." 

Meanwhile, the Biden campaign reacted to the verdict, saying Trump "has always mistakenly believed he would never face consequences for breaking the law for his own personal gain. But today’s verdict does not change the fact that the American people face a simple reality." 

"There is still only one way to keep Donald Trump out of the Oval Office: at the ballot box. Convicted felon or not, Trump will be the Republican nominee for president," Biden campaign spokesman Michael Tyler said. 

Tyler added: "The threat Trump posed to our democracy has never been greater."

And ex-Trump attorney Michael Cohen, the prosecution's "star witness," celebrated the verdict. 

"Today is an important day for accountability and the rule of law," Cohen said in a statement to Fox News. "While it has been a difficult journey for me and my family, the truth always matters." 

Cohen also touted the conviction of Trump in a post to X, writing, "Guilty On All Counts! #TeamCohen."

During closing arguments this week, defense attorneys for former President Trump told the jury he is innocent, did not commit any crimes and that Bragg "did not meet the burden of proof. Period." 

"President Trump is innocent. He did not commit any crimes. The district attorney did not meet the burden of proof. Period," Blanche said. 

Blanche added that the case is "simple" and it is "not a guilty verdict." 

"This case is about documents; it is a paper case," Blanche said. "This case is not about an encounter with Stormy Daniels 18 years ago. It is not even about a nondisclosure agreement signed eight years ago."

Blanche said the charges are about whether Trump "had anything" to do with payments to his ex-attorney, Michael Cohen, on his personal accounting ledger.

"The answer? The bookings were accurate and there was no intent to defraud and there was no conspiracy to influence the 2016 election," Blanche said. "The proof doesn’t add up."

Blanche told the jury they cannot convict Trump based on Cohen’s testimony, recalling how Trump’s ex-attorney "took the stand and then lied."

"The records are not false and there was no intent to defraud," he said.

Blanche said not one single invoice was sent to Trump directly and that Cohen billed Trump "for services rendered." He also told the jury Cohen rendered services as Trump’s personal attorney in 2017.

Blanche noted Cohen had lied to both Houses of Congress, federal judges, state judges and family.

"You cannot send someone to prison based upon the words of Michael Cohen," Blanche said, adding that a verdict needs to be reached based on evidence from documents and witnesses. "If you do that, this is a very quick and easy not-guilty verdict." 

Meanwhile, prosecutor Joshua Steinglass delivered his closing argument for more than five hours Tuesday, saying the prosecution has presented "powerful" evidence in their case against Trump. 

Steinglass said Trump’s intent to defraud "could not be any clearer," arguing that it would have been far easier for him to pay Stormy Daniels directly. Instead, the prosecutor said, he concocted an elaborate scheme and everything he and his cohorts did was "cloaked in lies."

"The name of the game was concealment and all roads lead inescapably to the man who benefited the most: the defendant, former President Donald Trump," Steinglass said.

Steinglass defended the prosecution's use of Michael Cohen as a witness, telling the jury: "I’m not asking you to feel bad for Michael Cohen. He made his bed." 

"But you can hardly blame him for making money from the one thing he has left, which is his knowledge of the inner workings of the Trump Organization," he said. 

"We didn’t choose Michael Cohen to be our witness. We didn’t pick him up at the witness store," Steinglass said. "The defendant chose Michael Cohen to be his fixer because he was willing to lie and cheat on the defendant’s behalf." 

Trump defense attorneys, in their second attempt to dismiss the case earlier this month, said no evidence had been presented by the prosecution to connect the former president to any falsification of business records. Defense attorneys motioned for dismissal after Michael Cohen, Trump’s former attorney and the prosecution’s "star witness," finished his testimony.

He testified that he personally made the $130,000 payment to Daniels using a home equity line of credit in an effort to conceal the payment from his wife. Cohen said he did this because Trump told him to "handle it" and prevent a negative story from coming out ahead of the election.

But Trump’s defense attorneys maintained that the president never directed Cohen to do so.

Cohen testified that he was "reimbursed $420,000" for the $130,000 he paid to Daniels. Cohen said former Trump Organization CFO Allen Weisselberg suggested he "gross up" the payments and that Trump knew the details of the reimbursement.

The prosecution presented Cohen with 11 checks totaling $420,000. Cohen confirmed that they were all received and deposited. The checks had a description of a "retainer," which Cohen said was false.
