Donald Trump needs to pay just $175 million to put his $454 million civil fraud judgment on hold during his appeal, a New York appellate court ruled, giving the former president a crucial win on the cusp of a financial deadline.

Trump, however, still faces legal headwinds on other fronts: On Monday, a judge overseeing a separate, criminal case involving a hush-money payment to a porn star ordered the trial to start April 15. The decision keeps that case on track to be the first of Trump’s four criminal matters to go to trial just as he runs for president as the presumptive Republican nominee

The last-minute reprieve to the $454 million civil judgment came on the day that New York Attorney General Letitia James, a Democrat who brought the case, could have started enforcing it. A trial court judge last month ruled in James’s favor, finding that Trump fraudulently inflated his wealth. 

While a five-judge panel on Monday found that Trump only needs to pay a fraction of the judgment for the time being, he could be on the hook for the full amount if he loses his appeal. A spokeswoman for James said Monday that Trump still faces accountability and the judgment still stands.

The case has been a burden for Trump as he racks up legal fees in defending himself in four criminal cases. Trump’s legal team had said it was virtually impossible to secure a bond to cover the whole judgment. 

Trump said Monday that the New York state appellate-court ruling was a vindication of his view that the judge who imposed the $454 million judgment was wrong. He said he would either post a bond or pay cash to cover the reduced $175 million. “We’ll put it up very quickly and we’ll win the case,” Trump said.

The court gave him 10 days to meet the commitment. The five-judge panel also put on hold other penalties, including bars on lending and on Donald Trump and his two older sons from serving in leadership roles at the company.  It ordered that a monitor overseeing the Trump Organization’s operations remain in place.  

In last month’s fraud ruling, Justice Arthur Engoron concluded that Trump and his business fraudulently inflated his net worth for financial gain, including to obtain low-interest loans. The judge imposed $355 million in penalties, plus interest, meaning Trump’s debt grows by the day. The judgment now stands at about $454 million. 

The appellate court won’t decide on Trump’s appeal for months, but its decision on Monday might indicate that the judgment ultimately could be reduced, lawyers said. A different panel of judges could hear Trump’s appeal in the fall.

“By lowering the bond amount, the appellate court may be signaling some concern with the size of the judgment of the lower court,” said lawyer Adam Pollock, a former assistant attorney general in New York. 

Reducing the bond amount isn’t the norm, but it does happen from time to time, according to Brian Ginsberg, a partner at law firm Harris Beach who previously worked on appellate cases in the state attorney general’s office.  “In some cases, appellate courts, including this particular appellate court, grant stays pending appeal without the posting of any bond at all,” he said.

James already had begun laying the groundwork for pursuing Trump’s assets. Her office registered the judgment in Westchester County, N.Y., the location of Trump’s Seven Springs property, which is a procedural step before asset seizure.

Trump’s campaign had been raising money off the looming collection, vowing in emails to supporters over the weekend that Trump Tower, his flagship Manhattan building, “will never be captured!”

The former president’s net worth has been estimated at $3 billion, but much of it is tied up in real estate. While Trump has a potential windfall coming after investors approved a plan to take his social-media company public, he likely won’t be able to tap in to those funds for months.

Trump’s separate New York hush money case is back on track to be the first of his four criminal matters to go to trial. Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg charged Trump last year with 34 counts of falsifying business records to cover up a hush-money payment to porn star Stormy Daniels on the eve of the 2016 election. Trump has denied wrongdoing and accused Bragg, a Democrat, of being politically motivated. 

The case took a detour after the district attorney’s office this month said federal prosecutors had just handed over thousands of pages of evidence in recent weeks. Trump’s lawyers argued Bragg didn’t sufficiently seek to obtain those records from the federal prosecutors, who had investigated Trump and declined to charge him. 

After a hearing Monday, Justice Juan Merchan, who is presiding over the case, declined Trump’s bid to dismiss the charges. 

He scolded the Trump lawyers for making unfounded accusations, and said the district attorney’s office wasn’t at fault for the late records.  “You are literally accusing the Manhattan D.A.’s office and the people assigned to this case of engaging in prosecutorial misconduct, and of trying to make me complicit in it,” Merchan said. 

He said that while jury selection would begin April 15, he would assure potential jurors could still observe the coming Jewish holidays.
