Title: Florida Abortion Rulings to Keep Issue Front and Center in November
Source: Wall Street Journal
Published: 2024-03-25T00:00:00
URL: https://www.wsj.com/politics/elections/florida-abortion-rulings-to-keep-issue-front-and-center-in-november-1168511c
Text: A pair of decisions by the Florida Supreme Court are poised to help Democrats keep abortion rights top of mind for voters heading into November, when the party will try to hold on to the White House, its narrow Senate majority and retake the House.

On Monday, the state’s highest court issued a ruling that clears the way for a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy to take effect next month. In a separate decision, the state court approved a ballot measure that, if successful this fall, would undo that ruling and restore the broad abortion access the state had before the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022.

Florida is not considered one of the top presidential battleground states this fall, but it does have a Senate race and a handful of congressional races that could become competitive. And it will give Democrats nationally a chance to elevate an issue where they have a political advantage over Republicans, who have hoped to keep the public focused on the economy, immigration and President Biden’s general fitness for office.

“People see this as a positive reason to go out and vote, and it gives energy to people,” said Matt Grodsky, a Democratic strategist based in Arizona, a top political battleground where abortion is also expected to be a major issue.

Since Roe fell, abortion-rights advocates have won seven straight referendum victories. And Democratic candidates for governor, Congress and state legislative contests have successfully campaigned in opposition to abortion restrictions.

Grodsky said support for abortion access crosses party lines, but Democrats would still need to campaign hard to convince voters that Democratic candidates would be the ones to protect abortion access.

Biden has fallen behind former President Donald Trump in most polls, including a Wall Street Journal poll from February, in their rematch later this year. But that same poll, in which voters held a dim view of his stewardship of the economy and expressed concerns about his age, found 60% of voters said abortion should be legal in all or most cases.

After the twin rulings Monday, Julie Chavez Rodriguez, the campaign manager for Biden’s campaign, said in a memo that investing in Florida is a potential pathway to Biden’s re-election, without detailing how it would spend there. She said the GOP “attacks on reproductive freedom will help mobilize and expand the electorate in the state.”

The campaign released a television ad airing in battleground states and on national cable tying Trump to the Roe decision. Biden, in the ads, says he is running “to make Roe v. Wade the law of the land again, so women have a federal guarantee to the right to choose.”

Trump has urged Republicans to take a less restrictive approach after abortion bans, which passed in the aftermath of the overturning of Roe, helped field Democratic wins. He recently said he is nearing a decision on a stance on federal abortion limits that he hopes will be seen as a middle ground. At the same time, he has taken credit for nominating the conservative Supreme Court justices who eliminated the constitutional right to abortion.

“President Trump supports preserving life but has also made clear that he supports states’ rights,” Brian Hughes, a Trump campaign senior adviser, said in a statement after the ruling. 

Early polling has shown that more than 60% of Floridians support the amendment—enough to clear the threshold for amending the state’s constitution. The ballot measure would render the six-week ban unconstitutional.

Florida joins a group of at least half-a-dozen states where abortion-rights proponents are trying to get measures on the ballot that would expand or protect access to the procedure, including Arizona and Nevada which are both major presidential and Senate battlegrounds and have competitive House races. Montana, which has one of the most competitive Senate races in the country, could also see such a measure. 

Once seen as a political battleground, Florida has moved away from Democrats. Trump won the state by 3 percentage points in 2020, but Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, won his re-election by 19 percentage points in 2022, the same year many other Democrats had victories around the country. Democrats see Florida’s Senate seat as one of their few pickup opportunities on a national map that favors Republicans, though political observers say Republican Sen. Rick Scott has a clear edge. 

Some Republicans have acknowledged the issue has benefited Democrats and urged their party to change the way they talk about it. 

We need to “recognize the political liability of bans and accept the idea of abortion limits because people are going to be much more open to that,” Republican strategist Alice Stewart said. She urged Republicans to support some access to the procedure—she said restricting abortions after 15 weeks was reasonable—with exceptions for rape, incest and the life of the mother. She said that would allow Republicans the opportunity to paint Democrats as too extreme on the issue.

Republicans have in recent weeks also been on the defensive regarding their views on in vitro fertilization, after the Alabama Supreme Court ruled in February that frozen embryos can be legally considered children, raising concerns about the future of fertility treatments in that state. 

After the court ruling in Alabama, the state’s GOP-led legislature passed a law to shield providers from prosecution if embryos are destroyed during IVF treatments. Still, Democrats have begun running on IVF nationwide, working to tie that issue and abortion together by highlighting the stance held by many Republicans that life begins at conception.

Proponents of the Florida ballot measure say they have raised some $18 million to get the measure on the ballot and support its approval by voters. Antiabortion groups, meanwhile, have been sharpening their tactics after a series of defeats and plan to argue the measure would allow virtually unlimited access to the procedure. 
